---
layout: post
title: Time and Attention
published: false
---

Time is the same, objectively, for everybody. Since time cannot be managed, the only thing that can be managed is our own attention, what are we going to pay attention to, when and for how long. Okay, those are all quantitative concerns but there is also a qualitative element here and that's where so many of us fall down. It's also something that those in the productivity space are not addressing much although many are hinting at it. 

Merlin Mann especially gets very close to talking about this, mostly because he talks so much about his own process. That is in fact pretty much all he talks about. He has made what looks like a full time job talking about writing a book (which I assume is the full time job he is supposed to be pursuing). This is terrific because if gives a real glimpse into the nature of Merlin's work process as well as the quality of his thought. 

To get back to the quality thing. I suspect that productive folks are not just doing different things but are also doing things differently. I suspect that Merlin has a different experience of his work than I have of mine.  He alludes to this when he says that, although Stephen King listens to AC/DC when he writes listening to hard rock will not make you write like Stephen King. Because Stephen King is doing something different when he sits down to write than most of us.  Right now I'm paying attention to what I'm writing, but my guess is that the *quality* of my attention is different than King's.  I would guess that his focus is deeper and the range of thoughts and feelings he can access at his keyboard is greater (by a long shot) than mine.

Of course, just the quantitative stuff is hard enough, probably because of the way human beings have evolved to manage our attention. Seth Godin popularly [talked about the "Lizard Brain"][typepad], the part of us that is "responsible for fear and rage and reproductive drive" and "hates change and achievement and risk".  The idea is that we fear taking risks even though the cost of failure in today's world is much lower than it was when we developed such an aversion to avoid fatal events.  In this model, human beings are resistant to change and want to preserve stasis.  I think less attention has been paid to the flipside of this phenomenon which is that while we are loathe to change our own behavior, we are especially attuned to changes in the behavior of our environment.   In other words, we like to pay attention to stuff that is changing or stuff that is slightly novel because small changes in our ancestor's environment might have signaled the arrival of a predator or food source.  

Today, of course, our environment is awash in constantly shifting stimuli, best embodied by the "stream" of Facebook or Twitter. This is stuff that is really easy and satisfying to pay attention to. On the other hand our work often consists of little or no external stimuli. My work consists of a computer screen of static text which changes not one whit until I take some action. This is the horror of the writer's blank sheet of paper a lack of stimulus that thousands of years of evolution has geared us to ignore in favor of whatever new images or ideas are flickering by elsewhere. 

[typepad]: http://sethgodin.typepad.com/seths_blog/2010/01/quieting-the-lizard-brain.html	